Stage 1: Topic Selection

Topics that interested me

Topic 1: Social Media Filter Bubbles

Topic 2: Bias in Ride-Sharing Algorithms

Topic 3: Language Bias in AI Translation

Final Topic Decision: Social Media Filter Bubbles

Topic Sentence: I will examine how any kind of social media
recommendation algorithms can create an echo chamber that could create
political polarizations and cyber bullying. I will also be analyzing
some pros and cons about it.

Stage 2: Research Question + Working Thesis

Name: Jackson Trombley

Topic: Social Media Filter Bubbles

Research Question: How does any kind of social media recommendation
algorithms shape the way people see things to cause problems like
political polarization and cyber bullying, and what is the cause of
filter bubbles occurring

Working Thesis Statement: Social media recommendation algorithms shape
how people see the world. This happens because posts that people either
click on, comment on, like the post, or follow the account it's on can
cause the social media’s filter bubbles to filter in posts that relate
to ones you've seen before. This can cause people to see only one side
of certain topics which could lead to things like political
polarizations, cyber bullying, and much more depending on the topic.

Stage 3: Annotated Bibliography

Name: Jackson Trombley

Date: 10/4/2025

Research Question: How does any kind of social media recommendation
algorithms shape the way people see things to cause problems like
political polarization and cyber bullying, and what is the cause of
filter bubbles occurring.

1. Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding
from you. Penguin Press

The book that was written by Pariser shows how people's algorithms limit
what users see online based on what they watch. He warns you that this
issue can lead to people having personal arguments on certain sides of
arguments that no one knows anything about. This source shows the
understanding and concept of what filter bubbles are and what problems
they could cause. It helps explain how algorithms affect political views
or social interactions based on what videos are viewed and what
conversations are happening. This book may be old, being published in
2011, however Pariser shows some real examples and interviews to support
his points he makes in this book. This source is used to define and
explain the filter bubble based on some serious problems with it.

2. Cinelli, M., Morales, G. D. F., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W., &
Starnini, M. (2021). The echo chamber effect on social media.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(9), e2023301118

This source explores how echo chambers can start to form on popular
social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, and more. The source
explains how users will engage with content that lean toward what they
believe. This article showcases how arguments from recommendation
algorithms cause problems in the political departments. The political
problem exposes things like political polarization and reduces exposure
to alternative viewpoints. This source is good however it more focuses
on the political problems that social media filter bubbles can cause.
This is one of the better articles to read on if you want to learn about
the political polarization problem of filter bubbles.

3. Duskin, J., Schafer, B., West, J., & Spiro, E. (2024). Echo Chambers
in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter's Friend Recommendation
System. arXiv preprint

This paper mainly talks about following certain accounts on twitter and
other social media platforms. Following accounts can result in filter
bubbles happening which causes the whole problem starting. This creates
an echo chamber by promoting connections with similar viewports for what
account your following. You mainly see it if the account you're
following is a political topic. The site is pre-print but it offers
up-to-date insights. This source shows the algorithm's shape and social
networks showing both political polarization and diverse viewpoints.

Stage 4: Detailed Outline

Name: Jackson Trombley

Date: 10/17/2025

Topic: Social Media Filter Bubbles

Research Question: How does any kind of social media recommendation
algorithms shape the way people see things to cause problems like
political polarization and cyber bullying, and what is the cause of
filter bubbles occurring.

Throughout this massive topic that I’m researching about, I will explain
the concept of recommendation algorithms and define the key terms of
filter bubbles and echo chambers. The sources I have used will explain
the main points of this topic. Source one will explain how the filter
bubbles can create toxic behavior on the internet about certain topics,
source number 2 will explain how echo chambers are different from filter
bubbles and how they can cause problems like political polarization, and
source number 3 will explain how algorithms work and how they can create
filter bubbles on any social media platform. I will also take the time
to explain any pros and cons of this topic while also explaining how the
cons can be fixed if they affect people in a bad way. Finally I will sum
up everything and what I think is the best thing to do to prevent
serious problems that it could cause to people and their life.

Stage 5: First Draft

Social media is used by a lot of people and each person uses it in a
different way. Social media in general has become a popular site to look
at around the world. New features get added to each social media
platform to make their experience better. However, there is one feature
that is a huge deal in many different ways. A good majority of people
mostly use social media to watch things that catch their attention. Most
of the time it could be a post from a friend or family, a post of a
subject you like, a game, and many more. That's where the social media
filter bubble comes in. The social media filter bubble is a system on
all social media platforms that help generate similar posts that relate
to ones that you have seen before. This feature sounds fine but in some
cases, people could use social media to see topics that can have
multiple different viewpoints. These could be things like political
discussions, daily news, drama, or anything that is a serious deal in
our world. The social media filter bubble will generate what the people
have seen on their page but it will only generate one side of it. This
leads to people favoring one side of a topic without even hearing the
other side of a topic which could result in some big arguments. In most
cases, people don’t understand the topic and could just get bullied
online which could result in some serious things. In general there are
some good things that can come from these social media filter bubble
features However, there are plenty of bad things that could happen to
people. There can be ways to fix these problems to ensure no one
experiences a bad experience on any kind of social media platform.

This problem is caused by what people see online. A book that was
written by a person named Pariser in 2011 shows how people's algorithms
limit what users see online based on what they watch. He basically warns
people that this issue can lead to people having personal arguments on
certain sides of topics that no one has a clue of. The main topic that
causes this is political topics because there are always two sides in a
political topic. Most of the time people will argue on what they think
is the most valid statement of a political topic. An article called “The
echo chamber effect on social media” talks about how users will engage
with content that lean toward what they believe. In the political
department this article exposes things like political polarization and
reduces exposure to alternative viewpoints. Topics like these could get
recommended to people if people follow the accounts that the videos are
on. This creates an echo chamber by promoting connections with similar
viewports for what account your following. These three sites basically
explain how easy it is to get these social media filter bubbles to
happen on your account and how easy the arguments could occur.

There are ways these problems that these articles talk about can be
fixed. The main thing that I can think of is if the social media
recommendation filter bubble could recommend both sides of a political
opinion when you watch only one side of it. This way people can see both
sides of a topic and have a better and clear understanding on the topic.
The people will only agree with one side but at least they know what the
other person is saying and if they are right or not. This solution can
also apply to other topics with different sides. It's a good way for
people to see both sides of a topic and it should cause no serious
arguments. There are other bad things about social media filter problems
but the best way these problems can probably be fixed is if there is an
option on the social media platforms to turn the recommendation system
on or off. That way people who do want to use the recommendation system
to get videos that they want can use it but for safe purpose there
should be an off system and it's probably best that the default option
should be off for those who don’t know the certain problems the feature
could cause.

I’ve mainly talked about the cons about this feature since they were
serious but what about the pros of this feature. To put it simply, the
best use for it is to make watching your favorite videos on social media
easier because it makes finding the videos relating to your topic
easier. On most social media platforms, you can always just follow the
person accounts to get videos from the account on your for you page but
in case you don’t thats what the feature is for. That's mainly the
purpose of the social media filter bubbles, the feature mainly depends
on how you use it but just make sure you use it with caution and try to
hear people out and understand the topic they are talking about more.

You may be wondering, what problems could the social media filter
problems could cause. The main problem that could happen is cyber
bullying. Cyber bullying in general is awful and has been a common
problem for people who use social media. Cyber bullying can happen in
this topic by people arguing with what videos you’ve seen online and if
people really don’t like your point of view they will probably go out of
their way to harass you online because they don’t like what you think.
Social media filter bubbles in general can just cause negative
interactions which can cause people to just be anxious online or just in
public in general especially if they haven’t interacted with anybody in
public. In general, people’s lives could be ruined because of what they
see online and what people they interact with online because they
haven’t seen other sides of certain topics.

All in all, the social media filter bubble is a feature that could be
good or bad depending on how it is used. The feature in general
shouldn’t be removed completely but in my opinion there does need to be
improvements to fix the serious problems that it could cause to people’s
social media experience. The feature is supposed to be used to help your
video searching experience easier not to start arguments. It's ok to
have your opinion on certain topics but it's important to hear people
out and not make them feel terrible for not agreeing with you especially
if they don’t understand what you are saying. In the future there will
be more new features and those features will probably have similar
problems like this one but there are always ways to fix those problems
and hopefully they will be safe for everyone to use and not cause major
problems for people’s social media experience.

Sources Used

1.  Cinelli, M., Morales, G. D. F., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W., &
    Starnini, M. (2021). The echo chamber effect on social media.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(9), e2023301118

2.  Duskin, J., Schafer, B., West, J., & Spiro, E. (2024). Echo Chambers
    in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter's Friend
    Recommendation System. arXiv preprint

3.  Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding
    from you. Penguin Press
